Culture of excellence
==========

I believe every student and teacher in the district should not just
succeed, but excel. We have the resources to do that. We just don't
have the culture. When I mentioned this to a school committee member,
the response was that, by definition, not all students can excel. This
was backed by a statement about some students needing to be in low
percentiles on achievement scores, by definition of a percentile.

That's not what excellence is about.

Excellence comes from focus, passion, and interest in specific topics,
of which there's an infinite variety. Almost all students at MIT
excel, whether that's by competing in [solar car design
competitions](http://solar-cars.scripts.mit.edu/main/), [teaching in
China](https://ceti.mit.edu/), or organizing [nerdy cultural
experiences for
freshman](http://web.mit.edu/random-hall/www/rush.shtml).

You don't need to be MIT for that to happen; I've seen the same
culture at many schools. My high school had that culture in its
journalism program. Students pursued whatever they were doing -- be it
editorial writing, news reporting, graphic design, advertising,
business development, photography, IT, or otherwise -- with passion
and excellence. MIT students succeed based on that culture, combined
with a very strong [Pygmalion
Effect](http://discovermagazine.com/2015/dec/14-great-expectations),
where everyone believes they will succeed. The demographic differences
count for much less than one might think.

Students who excel at their academic interests -- almost no matter
what they are -- will pass basic math and writing exams as a side
effect. Whether students learn to write on a school newspaper,
crafting a business model, or writing a grant proposal, they'll learn
to write *well*, to target an audience, to be clear, and to
communicate. They'll learn all of these skills better than they would
through artifical essays in traditional grade school literature
courses.

We have a proof of how programs focused on excellence work in CPSD
already. Amigos is the top-performing school in the district. Chinese
Immersion bumped MLK up several tiers. The Ola program is small enough
that it's hard to have hard numbers, but from what I've seen (I spent
a day visiting a classroom), it is a district-leading program as
well. The language immersion programs, originally criticized for
piling too much on students, have proven that students excelling at
*something* will dramatically outperform students in traditional
classrooms.

Now we need to spread and expand such models.

A footnote on diversity
----------

Learning to support all the different ways students may want to excel
is at the core of resolving many of the diversity issues in the
district and supporting all learners, regardless of background or
level.

Several school committee members describe Cambridge as a town divided
between town and gown, and further divided on racial lines, further
among levels of students, and so on. While this segmentation seems
technically correct, I'm not sure
[labeling](https://simplypsychology.org/robbers-cave.html) students is
helpful to resolving the problem. It leads to stereotype threat.
[Multiplication is for White
People](https://www.amazon.com/Multiplication-White-People-Expectations-People%C2%92s/dp/1595588981)
is an excellent book about how this plays out, and the effects it has.

CPSD's model of diversity defines it in terms of race, gender, LGBTQ
status, and income. This segmentation misses groups which aren't
well-labeled or currently politically fashionable: introverts, closet
Republicans, members of less politically popular religions, less
disadvantaged immigrants (who are still often lonely and isolated),
and just about anyone else who doesn't fit one of the labeled
molds. Perhaps more importantly, it even misses people who only
partially fit the molds of the population studies.

What's great about pursuit of excellence as a model is that it fits
*all* students by design, regardless of culture, background, or
group. It integrates rather than divides. Whether a student wishes to
develop leadership skills by becoming a community activist, delivering
a rousing church sermon, or teaching in Mexico, that student will be
supported by the school system.