Hello!

I'm Piotr Mitros, and I'm running for the Cambridge School Committee.

Why are you running?

While the Cambridge School District is one of the greatest public
school districts in the nation, it's performing greatly below its
potential. CPSD spends [$27,569 per
student](http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/state_report/ppx.aspx) -- the
fourth highest in the state, has connections to top education
researchers at schools such as MIT, Harvard, Lesley, and other
schools. We have some of the greatest teachers in
Massachusetts. However, CPSD still has several [several failing
schools](http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/accountability/report/school.aspx?linkid=31&orgcode=00490310&orgtypecode=6&). Many
high-SES parents are choosing to leave the district, either for the
suburbs or private schools, while many low-SES children are failing
basic math and literacy exams.

In short, I think we can do better. I have the experience in closing
achievement gaps and helping students succeed; I've helped to it in a
wide range of settings. I also have experience building organizations
which work.

What's your background?

For the past half-decade, I've served as the Chief Scientist and
founder of edX, an MIT-Harvard initiative to broadly improve
university education. The pedagogy I developed in the creation of edX
has successfully closed achievement gaps throughout the developing
world, in community colleges, and at state schools. In that role, I've
served as an interface to many education research communities --
psychometricians, constructivists, connectivists, educational policy
researchers, educational dataminers, and many others. 

Prior to edX, I was an early employee at two startups, one of which is
valued at over $1 billion, and the other at over $200 million. I hold
a Ph.D from MIT. As a student, I was involed in educational projects
in settings as diverse as Nigeria, China, and MIT.

In my time, I've seen good ideas and bad ideas in educational systems
all around the world, and in working with educational research
communities, I've seen many incredibly diverse approaches to making
school systems work better. I would like to find a way to integrate
these to make our school system better.

What's your plan?

Well, I believe innovation ought to come from students, parents, and
teachers. The role of the School Committee should mostly be to
facilitate, encourage, and support. 